so the Hebrews created history as we
know it
you don't get away with anything and so
you might think you can bend the fabric
of reality and that you can treat people
instrumentally and that you can bow to
the Tyrant and violate your conscience
without cost you will pay the piper it's
going to call you out of that slavery
into Freedom even if that pulls you into
the desert
and we're going to see that there's
something else going on here that is far
more Cosmic and deeper than what you can
imagine the highest ethical Spirit to
which we're beholden is presented
precisely as that spirit that allies
itself with the cause of Freedom against
tyranny I want villains to get punished
but do you want the villains to learn
before they have to pay the ultimate
price that's such a Christian question
at low doses uh people uh are often you
know quite silly when they can can talk
and and what plays out in their Mind's
Eye is uh is playful cartoon like
um
and and sort of silly and grotesque and
of course it can it can go deeper and
become
in a sense can can feel more serious and
frightening that occurs in play though
like if you imagine that what you're
doing when you read a serious novel
is something akin to play but if you
read a Dostoevsky novel you're playing
at a very deep level and so what that
would mean is that instead of playing
with superficial categories you can play
deeply and you know when children are
playing deeply they're really involved
in it like they can play pretend games
with children can become incredibly
serious they can act out very
complicated and even frightening
scenarios in their play they will do
that and I would say the seriousness of
play is not a consequence of the
admixture of negative emotion per se
it's an indication of the depth at which
the cognitive categories are being
transformed so the deeper they fall into
the play the more radical the
transformation is that's occurring
[Music]
thank you
hello everyone watching and listening on
YouTube and Associated platforms I'm
continuing my investigation today into
the domain of cognitive Neuroscience
with a bit of a side 4am to
psychotherapeutics and the use of
psychedelics in Psychotherapy with some
attention paid to Associated uh
implications for analysis of brain
function I'm pleased today to be talking
with an outstanding researcher in that
in those joint fields
Dr Robin Carhart Harris is the Ralph
metzner distinguished professor in
neurology and psychiatry and director of
neuroscape's psychedelics division at
the University of California San
Francisco
he moved to Imperial College London in
2008 after obtaining a PhD in
psychopharmacology from the University
of Bristol in 09 under the mentorship of
Professor David Nutt he relocated to the
Imperial College to continue fmri
research with his psychedelic drug
psilocybin derived from what have been
known culturally as magic mushrooms
in conjunction with Dr not
he built up a process of psychedelic
research that includes functional
magnetic resonance imaging and mag
Imaging with psilocybin
fmri Imaging with MDMA and plans for a
mrc-sponsored clinical trial of
psilocybin as a treatment for major
depression he was awarded an M.A in
psychoanalysis at Burnell University
London and a PhD in psychopharmacology
at the University of Bristol
he has designed human brain Imaging
studies with LSD psilocybin MDMA and DMT
and several clinical trials of
psilocybin therapy he founded the center
for psychedelic research at Imperial
College London in April 2019
was ranked among the top 31 medical
scientists in 2020 and in 21 was named
in Time magazines a hundred next a list
of a hundred Rising Stars shaping the
research future I wanted to start this
conversation by asking Robin about his
thoughts about the relationship between
categorization and
implicit learning and habian learning
all of those things together so
well the way I've been thinking about it
tell me what you think about this is
that
we have to impose a structure of
perception on the world in order to even
perceive it so our perceptions
themselves are categories and they're
implicit and
those categories can be functional and
provide us with what we need or they can
be dysfunctional and cause us all sorts
of misery and distress but that this
also pertains to the question of what
constitutes the unconscious a lot of
what the unconscious seems to be is the
implicit category structure that we use
to perceive the world through so that's
a proposition maybe I could get you to
comment on that as a proposition
yeah I I think that's a a reasonable
proposition
uh so much of what we learn is learned
implicitly really the majority
and uh the assumptions that we come to
the recognition of differences between
things which is the essence of
categorization
uh occurs uh implicitly and then is
encoded with uh varying degrees of what
you might call confidence or or
precision and that Precision develops
uh it can strengthen with repetition
um and then the encoding uh is is
stronger and the assumptions are more
influential
um and those processes are very much
processes that play out unconsciously
um and yet they dominate our
uh thinking the content of our thought
and our uh Behavior right so so imagine
for example for those of you watching
and listening that you you imagine a
Pianist who's playing a complex piece
and they play it repeatedly and when
they first start to learn it they have
to pay a tremendous amount of conscious
attention to everything they're doing to
every finger movement but as they play
it repeatedly they build specialized
neural Machinery to govern the motor
output that constitutes the ability to
play the piece and so they're automating
what is initially voluntary then imagine
that they automate a mistake like you
can play a missed note or you can
automate a phrase that's mistimed and
then you'll have learned something that
is now automatic but is also in error
and part of your theory of
Psychopathology is analogous to that in
some sense is that we'll practice
um modes of apprehending the world modes
of categorizing the world and make them
automatic but they're also
dysfunctional enough to cause us misery
and I guess your your theory with
regards to psychedelic usage is
something it as far as I can tell is
that psychedelic usage
enables the re
what would you say it's it re-novelizes
the environment or re-novelizes
experience so that the effect of that
over learning is ameliorated at least
temporarily and that gives the
cognitive system that gives the person
having the experience the opportunity to
lay down new conceptions that are less
constrained by that previous learning
then the question is well when would
previous learning be pathological
because that's a hard thing to figure
out
so it is it is and you know analogies
will help us here and uh one that is
perhaps relevant is uh is rebirth you
know we come into this world sure with
some uh inherited models uh
um and certainly they can you know come
into play as we live a life
um and they're they're activated and
engaged as we encounter aspects of human
experience but
you know as we develop and we learn and
we create associations these implicit
associations that become
ingrained and entrenched in our psyche
then
um yes it can happen that sometimes we
learn things too strongly
and they dominate our way of thinking
our way of seeing the world and our way
of Behaving and so the analogy I want to
come to is one of rebirth is you know in
a sense resetting the system
recalibrating the system and yes then we
will be experiencing the world with a
refreshed level of novelty okay so okay
so imagine this I'll go in two
directions from that so the first is
that
imagine that you grow up in a family
where the interactions between the
father and the mother and the children
are pathological so maybe the father is
narcissistic and Psychopathic at least
to some degree and so the children grow
up in that environment and they learn to
respond to anything masculine as if it
has these Psychopathic and narcissistic
characteristics and so their perceptions
are tuned in that
in that uh in that regard and then they
move out into the world
and there are all sorts of potential
male female interactions that obtain in
the actual world
and their perceptions aren't calibrated
properly for the more generic
environment because their specific
environment was tilted in a pathological
way but now they're very perceptions
have been tuned and that that's where
the unconscious is right it's in it's in
the structures that actually govern
perceptual categories and so what will
happen for say a girl in that situation
is she she won't be able to see anything
positive that a man might do because
that's so anomalous and outside her
perceptual
her domain of perceptual familiarity and
anything that's vaguely reminiscent of
the pattern that she's already learned
will elicit the whole pattern so part of
what happens in the psychopathological
environment is that you specialize your
perceptions for a micro environment
that's not generalizable to the broader
macro environment and that that's a good
way of of of of sort of zeroing in on
what actually might constitute a form of
psychopathological learning right so you
might you might come from a dependency
inducing familial background too where
you're really really taken care of to an
extreme and then you're going to learn
how to adapt to that and to see the
world as if that's how it's structured
then when you're thrown out into the
broader World in that level of intensive
care isn't forthcoming your perceptions
aren't adapted to that macro environment
to that broader macro environment now
that so that's one thing now you talked
about rebirth so I spent a lot of time
studying mirchia Elliott in particular
historian of religious ideas he was very
interested in the symbolic structure of
the idea of rebirth and so the way that
this is laid out in the broad
mythological literature is that the
rebirth and that would be a baptism too
is a return to the beginning of time
where chaos and possibility rule
unstructured
and so and that returned to the
beginning of time to see that
unstructured chaotic possibility is a
time for Rejuvenation and and renovation
and the the idea of baptism is actually
uh uh ritualistic attempt to produce the
kind of rebirth that is in principle
Redemptive now you have a theory about
how psychedelics works that makes
pharmacological sense of this notion of
the reconstitution of a generative chaos
if I if I've got the theory correct
right is that the psychedelics blow off
the over learning that constrains
perception or maybe even the learning
and the danger of that is everything
there's too much possibility and too
much chaos but the upside is a whole new
set of propositions that are more
germane to current life let's say aren't
outdated could conceivably be generated
approximately appropriate
yes it does and uh you know the the
analogy or the theme
the archetype perhaps of of baptism is
is useful baptism often involves a shock
whether it's you know being thrown in
water or water thrown on you or a
baptism of fire you know so there's an
appeal to
to
um
a period a state of of Chaos
and uh yeah and this opportunity for
for a
um a second go in a sense and you know
for the the child the scenario that you
were describing
um suffering you know complex
uh into relationships of familial
interrelationships the product of that
is that the child knows no different
right they've just learned really
adaptively in a sense even though it's
the product is maladaptive
they couldn't it couldn't have been any
other way they they the product in a
sense they can't have helped which is
probably why we we don't you know
necessarily incarcerate children you
know there's an innocence there they're
subjected to things and they develop in
a particular way and they can be victims
but there is that curious transition
into adulthood where of course
um
you know
um the there are moral judgments on on
behavior and so on and um and then there
is an assumption that you could know you
could have known differently you could
have been another way uh you know after
a certain level of development there's
sufficient metacognition or
Consciousness or self-awareness to not
be in a sense of victim to your
experiences
um
uh yeah and uh you know these um
these rebirths
uh if you look at mythology they may
happen you know as a kind of rite of
passage around a certain age Coming of
Age
um and perhaps there's a clue there
again to to some of the historical use
of psychedelic plant medicines for that
purpose right well I don't remember if
it was in one of your papers or one of
the associated papers that I've been
reading lately but the proposition too
was that you talked about baptism by
fire is that if an organism is
sufficiently stressed that can re that
can produce a state where rapid new
learning is possible now that's what
should happen right because if you're
stressed hyper stressed that means
something has gone radically wrong and
when something's gone radically wrong
that's a good time to learn something
new but the proposition too was that
what the psychedelics were doing in some
real sense was pharmacologically
mimicking the neuropharmacological
conditions that might obtain after
severe stress
and so by inducing that
pharmacologically that's right so so
this is a a model I introduced uh maybe
a couple of years ago now called uh
pivotal mental States and really it's a
way to
conceptualize and contextualize what
psychedelics are and what they do and
and I propose that they are drugs that
that hijack a stress response system but
that stress response system has evolved
and exists anyway of course uh it has to
the drug has to come in and in a sense
hijack and work on something that
already exists for a function outside of
the context of a you know somewhat alien
chemical coming in that you put into
your body
um so it was this in a sense a way of of
sort of having a more foundational
understanding of the Psychedelic
experience you know what is it outside
of the context of psychedelic drugs and
so there I looked at things like ascetic
practice
extreme experiences that can drive
intense
states of stress
where one comes to a crisis point a
pivotal mental state and then in that
pivotal mental state this moment right
now really matters right to where you
know your life's going to go from here
on
we'll be right back with Dr Carhartt
Harris in just a moment but first tis
the season of giving but you've already
given enough to your internet service
provider because when you go online
without expressvpn your provider can
track all of your activity they're
legally allowed to sell that data to
third-party advertisers for massive
profits stop giving away free
information start using expressvpn today
expressvpn encrypts and reroutes 100 of
your network data through their secure
server so your provider can't see a
thing just fire up the expressvpn app
and tap one button to connect you've
given enough to your ISP this year take
back your internet privacy today with
the number one rated VPN by techradar in
Mashable visit expressvpn.com Jordan to
get three extra months of expressvpn for
free that's
e-x-p-r-e-s-svpn.com Jordan to get an
extra three months free expressvpn.com
Jordan
[Music]
yeah well that strikes me as analogous
to the phenomenon that's often noted
among people who recover from alcoholism
so it's very common and I knew this I
learned this almost 30 years ago when I
was studying alcoholism and its
treatments even then it was known that
one of the most reliable treatments and
this has stayed constant in the research
literature was religious transformation
and so you think well and these are
hardcore non-religious scientists who
are putting this forward as a
proposition it's just a fact drawn from
Decades of observation about what works
and what doesn't work in the treatment
of alcoholism most things don't work
including treatment centers but but one
of the phenomenon that are that's
constantly reported by people who have
recovered from alcoholism is that at
some point they hit rock bottom right
and they have a devastatingly stressful
experience as a consequence of the fact
that their addiction has gone on out of
control and that hits them with
devastating Force you can imagine if
that's a hyper stress response and it
opens up the doorway to new learning
because it's so stressful that
everything in the environment gets
re-novelized in some sense that's
associated with an experience of awe and
there's a religious element to that
because the transformation is taking
place at a very deep level
and so they they hit something that's
hyper stressful and then they're
prepared for uh for radically new
learning for personality retooling in
some in some sense so and then so okay
so then I was thinking too
so you know in Psychotherapy there's a
rule of thumb and it's a good one that
if you can help people confront what
they're afraid of and avoiding
in manageable bite-sized pieces then
they get stronger and braver so so
imagine this imagine there's a hierarchy
of implicit presumptions
some are key and core and those would be
those assumptions that if disrupted
cause traumatic stress
and then there are less crucial
assumptions which are more like
peripheral perceptions and they're ones
that still have a lot of play they're
not hyper learned yet and they're not a
lot of not a lot of other conceptions
are dependent on them
so they're more peripheral so then when
you do exposure therapy with people
you have them confront the micro uh
categories that they're using to
to constrain and and formulate their
behavior and they can modulate those and
so they stress themselves a little bit
and that's enough to produce a little
bit of learning but if you do that
continually the system can incrementally
grow and change without having to
undergo dramatic stress-induced
revolutions
yeah what I would want to add in there
is that perhaps it's it's it perhaps
unlearning is even more important than
learning in that process so you know the
patience is being brought back to
uh traumatic memories traumatic themes
and feelings
um but the pathology that they present
with is one of arguably excessive
learning uh you know a defensive
learning yeah that needs to be unlearned
and so in order to bring someone back to
some semblance of of Health there is
arguably a need for a a confrontation to
go back there I mean this is the
principle of exposure therapy to go to
go back there and actually weaken
associations that have formed too
strongly to produce the Psychopathology
so so one of the things you wrote about
in your new paper is the emergent
literature pointing to something like a
general factor of psychopathology
right and then when I read that I always
think well that's neuroticism it's the
same factor analysis it's pointing to a
susceptibility to negative emotion and
when I after I talked to Carl Frist and
I was trying to sort out in my head the
difference between neuroticism and
openness the difference between
neuroticism and creativity now
creativity allows you to shift
categories
neuroticism seems to be the
susceptibility of categories to
stress-induced disruption
and so then the question is like so you
get stressed and you talk in your paper
the one you sent me about the fact that
stress also produces neural death
especially in this hippocampal systems
for example that are key to the movement
of information from short-term attention
to long-term storage so imagine that
when you encounter something stressful
the first thing that happens is that
there is category death and perhaps
neural death that's proportionate to the
degree of stress
and that might be a necessary
precondition for learning but it's not
learning right it's just the falling
apart of old pathological systems and
that's a problem because well now you
don't have the old pathological system
but you also don't have anywhere to go
right so it's only the death without the
rebirth and then people experience that
with extreme pain too because and I I
wonder sometimes too if that's
psychogenic pain like depression for
example isn't actually the psychological
consequences of the neural degeneration
and the category death that well that
we're referring to as a consequence of
stress
possibly yes I mean a theme I'd want to
bring in uh would be disconnect and uh I
suspect if we take a classic uh aspect
of neuroticism like depression
um then
um
uh there is I think depression and of
course this has been written about
um extensively and famously by the likes
of Freud
um there is a
a rhyth a sort of forced Retreat from
objects
um that one would invest in often
implicitly love objects you know but
that that's meant very
um broadly and generally so that might
be one's vocation you know that is a an
object of uh intense investment or in
Freudian language uh cathexis
um the investment of libidinal uh energy
and Freud's model of depression was that
that investment that we do when we you
know have get up and go we write papers
and fall in love and you know love our
family and children and so on if that's
cut off if there's a forced Retreat
um then where does that energy go and it
you know and that was you know Freud's
model of depression that it's sort of
damned up and it gets deflected back on
onto the self In This Very self-critical
way so I think it's a bit tangential
there but but I I wanted to bring in the
theme of Disconnect because
I imagine that there's something
important in
in neuroticism when it develops into a
depression uh that involves yeah some
kind of inability to invest in so so
I've been trying to conceptualize that
neurologically so imagine that imagine
that there's a hierarchy of conception
right and so we have some fundamental
conceptions upon which many other
conceptions are predicated and some that
are less fundamental now
before you question a category the
category should fail
now then that raises two questions is
how severe is the failure so let me give
you an example if you have an argument
with your wife about the dishes that
could mean that you should negotiate
who's going to do the dishes or it
should mean that you're you should get
divorced
now the thing about someone who's
depressed
is that they'll take a micro fight
and it'll Cascade all the way up the
conceptual system to the most
fundamental level they might go even
Beyond well not only should I get a
divorce because my marriage is hopeless
because then they'll go who could stand
to be married as to anyone as hopeless
as me I've always been hopeless my whole
past is hopeless there's nothing good
about the present and everything's just
going to get worse in the future I might
as well be dead and so what imagine this
imagine that there's a hierarchy of
conceptions
and there's a barrier for error
propagation
and the barrier is something like the
number of Errors you have to experience
at each level before you'll move up a
level
to question that presumption
and so then imagine the more neurotic
you are the fewer failures it takes at
any level
to move up another level to move up a
level higher in the hierarchy and
question something more fundamental and
maybe that's serotonin mediated so as
you become more socially
confident and your environment is
actually more benevolent because you're
more well placed your resistance to
error Cascade increases and when you're
depressed there's no resistance it's
every error propagates all the way up to
the most fundamental level
well the lack of a red wave during the
midterms lead to more Reckless spending
by a more emboldened Administration
higher taxes deeper inflation if you're
unsure how the next two years will
unfold talk to Birch gold group about
protecting your savings with gold Birch
gold makes it easy to convert your IRA
or 401K into an IRA in Precious Metals
so you can own gold and silver in a tax
sheltered account gold is the world's
oldest most proven form of currency when
inflation soars and all other assets go
sideways gold is still there this month
you can get a free gold back with every
five thousand dollar purchase when you
convert an existing Ira or 401K into a
precious metals Ira with Birch gold by
December 22nd just text Jordan to
989898 Birch gold will help you own gold
and silver in a tax sheltered account
text Jordan to 989898 to claim your free
info kit on gold then talk to one of
their precious metals Specialists with
every purchase you make before December
22nd you'll get a free gold back this is
a great stocking stuffer just in time
for Christmas text Jordan to 989898 and
protect yourself with gold today
yes if it's if it if it's that because
another possibility is that the data you
know in predictive coding we often talk
about error coming up the hierarchy uh
and sort of prediction or model coming
down the hierarchy but what one might
think of depression and a lot of
Psychopathology is too much top down you
know in a sense reality and you can see
this in depression you know the notion
of depressive realism is only partly
true typically a a proper depression you
know uh the real deal is is in a sense
delusional right right the and you can
measure this and yeah you can see the
people's you know forecasting of future
life events is way off they think that
only bad things are going to happen
nothing good and then you can actually
track that and see what happens and you
see that you know people were
catastrophizing yeah and the reality
wasn't that bad you know so that's
depression so I would argue that that's
uh that's too much model and the the
model is skewed and we we sort of
touched on this earlier you know tilted
in a particular way biased in a
particular way so there is this
fascinating question of why are you
biased where did where did that skew
come from why are you having to see the
world
through this bias through this skew what
do what does it do for well one of the
Mysteries there too this is why okay so
now we have a conflict in view of
depression in some sense because the way
I put it Forward was that it was in
excess of of error-induced chaos and the
way you just put it Forward was that it
was a a pathology of constrained
forecasting and but there's a there's
there's a point of agreement right we're
both agreed that something fundamental
has gone wrong and we know this right
because yeah the depressive realism
stuff mostly cognitive behavioral or
social psychologists using cognitive
behavioral derived scales used people
who were just barely threshold for
depression to formulate the depressive
realism idea if you have people who are
really depressed it's like everything is
terrible it's always been terrible and
it's going to be terrible into the
Future something and so what's really
interesting about that and this is why
something some fundamental set of
propositions must have gone astray
because and you're thinking about it as
something that's canalized into a very
narrow channel and I'm thinking about
about it more as the disintegration of
anything positive but you know there may
be a way to reconcile that is that
it it's it's it has to be fundamental it
has to be a primal set of conceptions
because it colors absolutely everything
right nothing escapes from the
depressive abyss and so it has to be
disruption in a system that's so
fundamental that all other cognitions
and perceptions depend on it so this is
part of the reason I was trying to make
sense of it in relationship to Social
Status right because we know that if
someone's Social Status false there are
tonic levels of Serotonin constraint
decrease and the large the logic in that
from an evolutionary perspective would
be that the more you're situated
properly optimally within a social
hierarchy the more benevolent the
environment actually is because you have
friends and you have people you can rely
on and you're getting a lot of attention
from other people and so it makes sense
that you don't have to be hypersensitive
to error because you're buffered but so
imagine you you get depressed and you're
and the mechanism that is adjudicating
your social status is pathologized and
it rates you as a one out of ten instead
of a 10 out of ten and then the
consequence of that is your whole
nervous system now is tuned to react as
if the environment the whole thing has
now turned on you and is dangerous which
which it is if you're actually socially
isolated and and extremely unpopular
right you are in that sort of danger so
yes that
but there is this interesting other
possibility I mean it is a very delicate
um question of whether a pathology is
adaptive or maladaptive or functional or
dysfunctional and and it has been argued
you know that a depressive episode is is
functional you know in a situation of
extreme social dilemma uh maybe it makes
sense in a sense to to withdr to retreat
to withdraw from the world in a sense to
hibernate for a while to stay out of
trouble for a while another possibility
and this again you know I do have a fair
bit of time for certain Freudian ideas
and another one in relation to
Depression was that it it
um it's often repressed anger
so rather than you know some social
dilemma plays out and you get aggressive
and you you do something dramatic you
know you kill someone then this could be
a this could be fatal for you very
easily in a you know a social network uh
um
way back when or now
um and so you know this is the argument
for civilization and its discontents
that actually you know to to retreat to
withdraw to go into oneself to hate
oneself instead of for example your boss
that sacked you or your partner who was
adulterous or what have you you know it
is could could be functional I know that
works depression well no no I think I
mean I think that it points to an
underlying permanent existential dilemma
which is well if you try and you fail
that could be in a micro Endeavor or a
macro Endeavor if you try and you fail
well you have two options well you have
three one is you can just ignore it and
sometimes that's the right thing to do
because if you tried again it would work
and so that's the utility of persistence
but you'd and you never know in some
fundamental sense whether you're being
persistent or blind right that's a tough
thing to figure out most entrepreneurs
who become successful have failed in a
dozen Enterprises before and so are they
persistent or have they failed to learn
from experience like well there's a
toss-up then then for imagine you don't
ignore it okay now you're gonna you're
gonna fix the problem well then you have
two choices you could fix the world
or you could fix yourself
and let's say well fixing yourself is
often at least in principle easier than
fixing the world although sometimes the
world is wrong and you're right not very
often but sometimes you know so if
you're going to fix yourself you've
failed multiple times the first thing
that has to happen is that the part of
you that's error written has to die
and so there is that element that's
exactly I would say in some sense the
payoff of neuroticism is well why have
negative emotion it's well
you get anxious so that you stop doing
things that might cause your own
destruction like there's there's value
in the signal but because it's so
difficult to determine like if you're
arguing with your wife this is constant
issue in marriages it's like well should
she change or you
and the answer sometimes is she should
and sometimes the answer is you should
and sometimes the answer is you both
should but it's not like that's easy to
figure out a priori
now you know I I think your your
argument you're making in favor of
depression in some sense is that well
now and then you should Retreat and
learn from your failures and of course
that's the case now the problem with
depression is that you get these macro
Retreats where everything falls apart
and
you might hope that you're not in a
situation where the right reaction is
for everything to fall apart very often
and it does look like people who are
prone to depression are prone to
having everything fall apart when it
would be much more meat and right and
even in terms of learning for something
smaller to be modified one of the things
I tried to do with my clients all the
time was to I wouldn't say minimize a
problem
but it would be to parameterize it
you know like maybe I'd have a client
who was so afraid of their economic
uncertainty that they wouldn't even tell
me how much rent they were paid because
I had clients like that and so I would
continue to inquire until I got them to
admit the terrible truth about their
rent and then we could narrow the
problem we could keep narrowing the
scope of the problem so they didn't feel
like the problem meant their entire
financial future was going to fall apart
and and it's that
and there's a canalization in that right
that narrowing where that's actually
beneficial
and so the model you sent me that the
paper you sent me I think if I've got it
right concentrated mostly on this over
learning as the fundamental
source of psychopathology
so yes
and uh
and that that was uh that was very
intentional I mean I I do believe it but
uh I I would like to think that one
useful aspect of the model is that it
invites people to understand pathology
uh to understand how it can be acquired
through experience people can be
differentially vulnerable or sensitive
but the pathologic pathology does have a
history there was a process there
and I think that that can help
caregivers and patients because it says
you know you can there is some
understanding to be done here I mean if
that wasn't true Psychotherapy wouldn't
exist and people wouldn't share their
problems and try and understand it um
and often you know the process was very
complex and um
you know not all the information is
necessarily
uh so easy to decipher and clear
um but that doesn't mean that it hasn't
developed and hasn't been acquired and
and actually there is some logic to the
presentation that that comes about now
that doesn't mean that you then accept
the pathology so I just wanted to
emphasize that right it just says that
we could understand this but it doesn't
say ah it's functional that you're
depressed so we just we'll we'll leave
it alone better you're depressed than be
you know a murderer or what have you
right um so then there's this question
of well if you understand the
presentation
you could also understand
um in a sense by understanding how it
serves you take an addiction for example
you know someone with an awful history
of complex trauma repeated abuse
develops a hard drug addiction and uh do
you rip that away from them and say be
well now have a huge you know
psychedelic experience and go fresh go
happy now you know or or is there
something a little bit more gentle and
sophisticated to how you would treat a
presentation like that even if you are
to treat it with say psychedelic therapy
well well on the addiction front I mean
generally let's say with alcohol
addiction which is a particularly
pernicious form of addiction and one
that's often deadly in the immediate
recovery because if you're
suddenly deprived of alcohol and you're
an alcoholic you can die of a seizure
that's very common in fact and so you
have to take people off alcohol somewhat
slowly so that doesn't happen but if you
put people in a treatment center
you can
get them over the physiological
dependence in a matter of weeks but
generally the literature indicates that
as soon as you put the person back in
their environment the probability that
they'll relapse is almost as high as it
would have been if they never went to
the treatment center at all and this
speaks to what you just said is that the
thing is and then this is part of the
Adaptive structure of the pathology so
you might think well the reason you're
an alcoholic is because you drink too
much alcohol
it's like well that's one reason you're
alcoholic and it's a cardinal reason but
here's some other reasons
all the things you do socially are
focused on alcohol
all of your use of leisure time is
alcohol use uh learned all of your
friends are likely to be alcoholic right
and so when you throw the person who's
now no longer alcoholic back into their
original environment
without preparation as soon as they go
see their old friends the probability
that they'll start drinking again is
extremely high it's because not only do
you have to remove the the pathology of
the dependence but you have to
substitute a whole new set of skills
that provides all the positive
interactions and ways forward
that the entire addictive lifestyle
provided before this is partly why when
an Alcoholics Anonymous works it works
is because it provides people with a new
peer group
and so so there is this problem you
could have the death of a pathological
system
but then okay
that the thing that was destroying your
life the presuppositions that were
destroying your life are now defunct but
that doesn't mean that you now have a
life
so so this this points back to this
conundrum that we've encountered in our
discussion so far you talk in this paper
that you sent me about this General
factor of Psychopathology and as I said
when I see that uh reminds me of factor
analytic studies of emotion showing the
powerful factor of negative emotion
eroticism and so it's definitely the
case that this General predisposition to
intense suffering is part of that single
factor of Psychopathology and that's
more like a propensity to experience
stress in re in response to chaos and
error but that's different than the
claim that it's pathologically canalized
learning processes that are core to the
essence of Psychopathology right because
you're you're really talking about a
pathological excess of order in some
sense whereas neurotism is a
pathological susceptibility to chaos so
I'm still trying to work out the do you
do you think do you think that there's
evidence that the overlearning
hypothesis that you're developing
is the same hypothesis as that which
emerges out of the factor studies of of
General psychopathology
[Music]
men is it time to stop mindless
scrolling time to finally gain that
higher quality of life you know you're
missing out on if this sounds familiar
then on January 9th join thousands of
men all over the world to embark on a
90-day journey together in search of a
better life
it's called Exodus 90 and it was built
to help men enjoy the freedom of
becoming who they were truly made to be
Exodus 90 guides you in removing the
attachments that are holding you back
from a better life and it actually works
independent research shows that Exodus
90 men report considerable shifts after
the first 90 days including stronger
satisfaction rates in their marriages
more meaningful prayer lives and
dramatic decreases in time spent on
their phones
for the past seven years Exodus has
helped more than 60 thousand men build a
road map for living with virtue in a
culture that offers far too many paths
to self-destruction
is it time for your Exodus we start
January 9th find resources to prepare
for Exodus at exodus90.com Jordan that's
exodus90.com Jordan
I think there's there's work to be done
to measure
what I mean by canalization right right
pathological over learning
and then to see whether it is true that
across the board trans diagnostically so
in whatever you know category of
psychiatric disorder you'll find this
phenomenon and it will be there and it
will be strong you know that's the
hypothesis that's the model that I've
presented I call it the the canalization
model of psychopathology
um
and you know as I say this paper
um simple models are as simple models
are too simple they don't um claim to
explain everything but they they do
propose to be able to explain something
important and and so you know the the
idea with this new model is that uh
there is a principal component you know
a dominating factor to Psychopathology
and uh I'm putting forward this idea
that it's excessive
um associative learning done for
psychologically defensive reasons right
well okay so in the same paper when
you're talking about the use of
psychedelic therapy you put forward some
cautions and so some of the cautions are
well maybe psychedelic therapy would be
less warranted in situations where you
already see an excess proclivity towards
associative thinking like pre-psychotic
States and so imagine that we could we
could hypothesize perhaps to begin with
that there are pathologies of order
and there are pathologies of chaos those
might be more associated with
neuroticism there might be pathologies
of creativity that would manifest
themselves let's say in something like
manic depressive disorder on the manic
end
so I'm wondering if that single factor
of obsessive over learning that you're
describing would characterize a subset
of pathologies that are specifically
characterized by over learning so that
would be do you know has anybody tried
treating obsessive compulsive disorder
with psychedelics for example because
that's certainly yeah so so what happens
yes they they have okay well
um yeah pretty promising findings and
it's being repeated now
um
I think Yale Imperial College London are
doing trials and the trial has been done
I think in San Diego
um so you know it's an indication that
makes sense again I do think it it fits
the model of uh of uh you know over
potentiated ways of thinking and or
behaving the compulsive action the need
to wash one's hands or yeah you know
have these intrusive thoughts that uh
that repeat
um and this very narrow category view
categorical Viewpoint right so much of
the world becomes disgusting and we know
that the psychedelics are good at
treating addictions like cigarette
smoking and that's also that's a that's
a good model for canalization because
the nicotine produces that hyper
learning
so so I I would say to your question is
this in a sense I don't know if you use
the the word just just a subset I I
would say it's the majority subset
that's the idea it's the principal
component and that's not to say there
aren't other components say a component
of
uh hyper associative thinking and
behavior erratic like a delirium
um and one can argue whether a manic
psychosis is like that it may be in a
sense but sometimes it's quite quick for
that state to become canalized right
right right
um uh and and also to say that that
component that component of
hypersociative thinking isn't arguably
isn't fundamentally pathological as well
because that's an infant you know that's
an infant that is someone in a
you know state of uh
um
gosh like a creative like Fugue State
yeah you know yeah um yeah
um so it's harder to see that actually
in my mind as as obviously pathological
yes it can be highly unusual to see that
in a grown person an adult
um but it happens and actually you know
going back to those pivotal mental
States those conversion type experiences
they often feature that
yeah and and they can be life-saving
those experiences you know right and
actually this now we're coming to the
really the flavor of of the Psychedelic
experience as well
right okay so so let's talk about the
Psychedelic experience for a minute so
when Huxley wrote about the Psychedelic
experience in the doors of perception he
referred to bergson who made the claim
that in some real sense Consciousness
was like a reducing valve is that
part of what our brains are doing and
they are primarily inhibitory at a
neurological level is taking an
unbelievably differentiated
are unbelievably undifferentiated
massive experience that's far too much
for us to process at any one time and
narrowing it incredibly to the few
elements that constitute the focus of
our attention at any one moment maybe as
little as three or four bits of
information from a stream of it of
information that would be incalculably
dense in terms of available bits and so
some of this catalyzed learning that you
describe is actually the use of
perceptual categories to reduce that
information flow and so what seems to
happen in the Psychedelic experience is
that that
a Priory restriction on perception and
its Associated emotions is lifted
temporarily
right and so the the bergsonian or
Huxley and model of psychedelic
experience that it
increases the breadth of that
information funnel that seems to be
correct and that's also being associated
if I remember correctly with increased
thalamic throughput so there's actually
more information coming up from the
sensory and the motivational and
emotional areas of the brain during a
psychedelic experience than under normal
conditions I think that's vollenweider's
work I think he's concentrated on that
yeah it's true I would say that the
thalamus is is is one of other
um in a sense hierarchically
subordinate structures and systems that
where the information can flow up to
high level cortex more freely under a
psychedelic the reducing valve analogy
and that it goes back to bergson is
curious because uh canalization is a
theme was was sort of brought to
prominence by uh Conrad Waddington
evolutionary biologist who used it to
try and explain phenotypes that get
stamped in that get entrenched you know
encoded into the genome but uh he took
it from from Norman Whitehead who took
it from Henri
bergsonry bergson yeah he offered the
analogy the image of a canal of a canal
uh and so that was the original
inspiration so I was curious that the
bugs and inspired Huxley with the
reducing valve right right that's an
interesting so here's something cool too
this is a bit of a segue but you'll
catch the significance of this there is
a paper published in nature just two
months ago
looking at uh genetic mutation
okay so the idea is that genetic
mutation is essentially a random process
and the reason for that is well let's
talk about genetic mutations that are
brought about by radiation solar
radiation and so forth and so they're
randomly knocking atoms out of the
genetic structure and producing random
mutation but it turns out that the error
correction
post DNA damage is not random
so the older the genetic structure
that's being damaged by The Cosmic
radiation the higher the probability
that it will be repaired by intrinsic
DNA repair mechanisms so there's a
hierarchy of
of genetic presumption built into the
code and so the cells will allow
variation on the fringes to take place
without correction but if the mutation
affects something that would be fatal
and because it's so core to the actual
biological uh continuation of the
organism then the probability that it'll
be error correct it reaches a hundred
percent and so this is you can think
about that as an analog it's analogous
to the conceptual structure right
imagine there's a hierarchy of
conception the the deeper the conception
the more fundamental it is to the whole
cognitive process the the the the more
caution there should be an undertaking
any sort of radical
radical revolution
because it's too destabilizing and the
less likely that will occur so yeah so
that was that's an amazing finding as
far as I'm concerned you know so that's
neat and that's canalization yeah right
that's you know the these are phenotypes
that uh that matter they're that are
essential and uh
um you can't rip them up right you could
have some variation at a superficial
level some creativity there but uh maybe
don't mess with certain fundamentals
well that's what that's well that's what
happens in post-traumatic stress
disorder too it looks like at least to
some degree is that fundamental
conceptual structures like the
trustworthiness of other people or the
trustworthiness of human beings per se
is brought into question and that
demolishes whole swaths of the of the
systems that interpersonal communication
and interactions depend upon so yeah but
you'll see Jordan that's that's true of
borderline personality disorder as well
you know others can't be trusted they're
catastrophizing the splitting
um and it's true in depression you know
so I I is it you know wherever there's
there are these biases uh in depression
you know I'm worthless life is pointless
better off dead and so on
um they are they're exaggerated in a
sense they're exaggerated responses and
yeah and then they're skewed and and
they're skewed beyond the data they're
sort of exaggerated response to the data
so so let's think about that data so
I've been thinking about
how how Psychopathology might be defined
formally and so
we talked earlier about the idea that a
child might have grown up in a micro
environment
where they learn patterns of
communication that are not applicable to
the broader macro environment
so imagine in the macro environment
imagine you have a hundred interactions
in a day with different people
imagine there's a pattern that you have
to manifest
for those interactions to go well and
that it's stable across all 100
interactions so like one rule would be
don't swear at someone the second you
meet them that's not going to iterate
well across multiple interactions so
people of course people don't do that
but my point is is that there are ways
of conducting yourself that are going to
get yourself in trouble regardless of
situation right so you imagine I had a
friend I used to go shopping with him he
was extremely socially fluent like a
real expert and when we would walk into
shops and the shopkeeper the clerk would
approach him he always took about 10
seconds to make personal contact with
the person instead of immediately asking
them whatever instrumental question
leaped to mind he would ask them how
they were doing and he actually meant it
and then he would listen and he'd ask
them you know where they worked in the
store and he tried to find out something
that they were proud of about working
there and he was really good at this
he'd make a solid connection with people
right away and going to different stores
with him was extremely enjoyable because
he would open people up and then they
would also be extremely helpful and so
he had mastered this style of
interpersonal communication that worked
across multiple instantiations so you
could imagine that the definition of a
pathop pathologically catalyzed
interpersonal style is one that worked
in a given microenvironment that was
extreme but doesn't generalize well
across multiple social situations it's
something so so there's a so Jacques
Bank step for example
he he paired animals together routes
together to let them play repeatedly
instead of just once now if you just let
them play once the big animal can
dominate the little animal
but if you have them play repeatedly
which is what they do in a naturalistic
red environment the little rat who could
be defeated the big red has to let him
win 30 percent of the time or the little
route will stop playing
so what banks have showed was that
across iterated social interactions
there was a pattern of social
uh ethic
that had to be instantiated if the
social interaction was going to maintain
itself and so and obviously what you're
doing when you're dealing with someone
clinically is you're trying to snap them
out of the narrowness of their
pathologically sheltered environment and
enable them to adopt a pattern that
generalizes across multiple social
situations
and so
whatever healthy would be would be that
pattern that that iterates well now that
doesn't mean we can specify it precisely
but it gives it a kind of conceptual
framework
Black Rifle coffee company is helping
you knock out your holiday shopping with
a ton of awesome new products this year
shop the best Brewing gear thermosis
mugs and apparel designed for folks who
love country and coffee Black Rifle
sources the most exotic roast from
around the globe all coffee is roasted
here in the U.S by veteran-led teams of
coffee experts stuff your Christmas
stockings the latest roast from
America's coffee for 10 off with the
code Jordan better yet sign your Secret
Santa up for a coffee Club subscription
imagine the joy of a pre-scheduled
coffee delivery your favorite roast when
you need the most it's the gift that
keeps on giving Black Rifle coffee
company is a veteran founded and
operated they take pride in serving
coffee and culture to people who love
America every purchase you make with
Black Rifle helps support veteran and
first responder causes go to
blackriflecoffee.com and use promo code
Jordan for 10 off coffee Coffee Gear
apparel and when you sign up for a new
coffee Club subscription that's black
riflecoffee.com with promo code Jordan
for 10 off Black Rifle coffee supporting
veterans and America's coffee
[Music]
yes yes it does and you know it makes me
uh think of um
you know it makes me think of uh
of of of archetypes and of
um perennialism you know and the
Psychedelic experience when people have
a realization that every type of being
is in me you know
um
and I can know love and compassion
even if I haven't experienced it you
know and then developed pathology
because of the harsh
um maybe unusual or at least skewed uh
um upbringing that that I had but then
um so why do you why do you think it
reminded you of the idea that there's a
multitude within do you think that's a
reflection of the possibility of these
diverse encounters is it something like
that
well I mean it's curious that it it's
not play unless
um one side can win a little bit
um because then it's just you know
dominating and it's it's not a game
right it's there's no there's no place
so you have to have that natural
variability maybe it was that thought of
sort of natural variability it can't all
be hard and a lack of love and you know
there's gonna be some there's gonna be
some range some diversity yeah well
that's another definition of play isn't
it for a system to have play means that
it has this ability to vary without
being too rigid this is the opposite of
catalyzation in some real sense yeah you
know and I think I think that there is
something fundamental to the idea of
play in terms of defining what a
psychopathological system isn't so
because one of the things Piaget pointed
out for example was that
in order for play to take place both
Partners in play have to agree
voluntarily
right so it it sets up a joint
perceptual framework and a conceptual
framework that people buy into
voluntarily and so one of the things we
could say about optimized social
interactions is that if they're
optimized then both people are engaging
voluntarily and both people want the
interaction to continue and that's a
that that actually only happens under a
relatively narrow set of preconditions
like like the preconditions for a good
conversation right I mean and then you
think that the conversation we're having
to the degree that we've put each other
on the edge of transformation
and that we're allowing play to take
place within us within both of us and
then hypothetically within those who are
listening that's we're doing it because
we want to do it but we're also doing it
because we're allowing optimized change
to take place and I think the fact that
we're interested in the conversation is
actually a marker for that
transformation
yes yes I mean it's it invites some
realizations about play and you know
what children might say you know if
they're if they were meant to be playing
you know that's what they signed up to
yeah and then the game changes somehow
and one of the partners says I thought
we were playing but I thought we were
playing you know right or imagine if if
we're having this conversation now and
instead of it being playful
um uh one of one of us was sort of
preaching a particular view or you know
dominating too much or trying to
convince the other of the way the world
is then it would stop being fun and it
would be like you know I'd be like I
thought we were playing I thought yeah
well that would also be an indication of
two
rapid canalization right so or or the
imposition of something already
catalyzed so if I was insisting that my
viewpoint was right then I would be
discounting whatever you had to say and
insisting that my catalyzed viewpoint
already dominate and so I might do that
because I don't want to let any of my
ideas go that might be one possibility
or I might do it in a cheap ploy to
obtain dominance as a marker of status
right the alternative would be that we
could both play
right and then whatever status
accomplishment would go along with that
so in this case it would be are people
going to listen to the podcast that
would be a consequence not of being
dominant but of being able to play
so
so there's something about there's
something about play I think that's key
to this issue of
of Psychopathology it's sort of like the
spirit of players and antithetical to
the to the psychopathological Enterprise
yes I like that and and and then you
know how play and creativity and art
um can go
can go together and you know art and
expression can work as a kind of
antithesis to canalization and pathology
you know when in a thorough yeah it's I
mean that's a a curious one is you know
when do you see the the best art in
relation to Psychopathology and I'm
trying to remember now I think
um
I mean the classic one is is a manic
episode is Mania and and great art you
know
um but uh I I think depression and art
uh it's a little bit more
um precarious that one yeah well it
could well it could easily be too that
to the degree that depression is linked
to Artistic production it's that the
artistic production is actually part of
the process that's lifting the person
out of the depression rather yes right
yes and and and in bipolar disorder you
know the quality check you know because
it goes my all my ideas are incredible
they're ingenious too they're all
worthless uh rubbish rubbish rubbish
rubbish oh oh this one this one's not
bad no yeah I I saw a movie which you
can find on YouTube of of Picasso about
1955 if I remember correctly it was
black and white and they had him paint a
I think it was a rooster but I'm not
exactly sure on a glass sheet and so he
spent a number of hours painting and it
was so interesting
to see him play because he wasn't trying
to produce a painting as the end product
he was playing with visual
representation and he probably erased
and repainted a hundred times while he
was working on the painting he'd paint
and race and paint and race paint and
race just constant play as he was
experimenting with hitting the mark you
know and so he wasn't he wasn't an
artist who was producing paintings he
was exploring visual representation so
yeah so I I think that we could start
thinking about
a healthy interpersonal dynamic as
characterized by something like the
presence of the spirit of play but also
we could think about play as a like a
microcosm of a pattern of social
interaction that actually works across
multiple potential domains of social
interaction you know it's it's why you
want your child to be a good sport
because you might say well it doesn't
matter whether you win or lose it
matters how you play the game the kid
doesn't understand that because they
want to win but your point as a parent
is yeah you want to win but you want to
win in a manner that makes other people
want to keep playing games with you
right and there's something that's
really core to what constitutes Health
about that and I like that conjunction
of the developmental literature on play
and the philosophical literature on play
and its association with creativity and
the idea of that is something that's
antithetical to Psychopathology
psychopathological condition occurs when
all the play has been taken out of a
system yes yeah yes and uh yeah I know I
I like that too you can think of uh
people who practice being well you know
like like uh experienced meditators
um
you can sometimes encounter these beings
and they are they're light they're like
a child they're they're an adult right a
bit like the Dalai Lama you know it's a
bit like a big kid maybe I I don't know
him very well you know you know that uh
I what's his name I don't remember the
reason Richardson
um Richie Richie Davidson right yeah
yeah he did uh EEG analysis of the Dalai
Lama and other Prof like uh practice
meditators and he showed that they
showed a preferential pattern of left
prefrontal activation that was
associated with a dominant state of
extroverted positive emotion and that
would go along with that it also goes
along with that gospel injunction you
know except as you become like a little
child you'll know Wise enter the Kingdom
of Heaven it's the same idea is that to
re and it's also associated with the
idea of neotni in evolutionary biology
right that we tend to evolve towards our
childhood forms that's so you know a
human skull looks exactly like an infant
chimpanzee skull
so that's yeah it's very interesting
Stephen J Gould pointed this out he
showed that animated creatures like
Mickey Mouse and so forth he showed a
whole variety of these
become increasingly neotenous as the
animation propagates across time they
become more and more childlike in their
features it's a kind of a universal
proclivity and so the idea with regard
to mental health would be something like
the ability to reattane that capacity
for play actually characterizes mental
health in the positive manner in
adulthood and then one question
neuropharmacologically would be do the
psychedelics put more play in the system
and the fact that they allow category
shift to occur much more
prolifically let's say seems to indicate
that the answer to that might be yes yes
I'm leaning towards a yes I mean at low
doses uh people uh are often you know
quite silly when they can can talk and
and what plays out in their Mind's Eye
is uh is playful cartoon like
um and and sort of silly and grotesque
and yeah
um of course it can it can go deeper and
become
in a sense can can feel more serious and
frightening well well I think play does
play that out though that occurs in play
though like if you imagine that what
you're doing when you read a serious
novel
is something akin to play but if you
read a Dostoevsky novel you're playing
at a very deep level and so what that
would mean is that instead of playing
with superficial categories which you
might be doing if you just read a cheap
romance and I'm not putting that down
I'm just saying it's it's a more
superficial form of play but you can
play deeply and you know when children
are playing deeply they're really
involved in it like they can play
pretend games with children can become
incredibly serious they can act out very
complicated and even frightening
scenarios in their play they will do
that so and I would say the seriousness
of play is not a consequence of the
admixture of negative emotion per se
it's an indication of the depth at which
the cognitive categories are being
transformed so the deeper they fall into
the play the more radical the
transformation is that's occurring yes
yes in fact the the notion of a play
like a drama you know uh if it's a good
play like you know a good theater
production then it has it has depth and
it can be serious and it can be moving
and
um so quite I guess the antithesis would
be a
um play that that gets stuck and gets
boring that repeats that yep and and you
know the analogy or that or where it's
too predictable right yeah that would be
canalized in some sense yes because all
it's doing then is it's running over a
plot and characterizations that you
already 100 percent know yeah
right so there's there's and that would
be a propagandistic I think that that
art degenerates into propaganda when it
becomes catalyzed right that's right you
have to say this it's like well we
already know that we already know that
that's already been insisted upon yeah
yeah we need some need some surprise
so could you talk to me a little bit
about this idea of local Minima you you
talk about canalization in the paper
that you sent me and and your your
proposition is something like when you
over learn something you end up in a
valley in a fitness Valley you can't get
out of it in some sense but I don't I
don't exactly understand that metaphor
so what how would you technically
characterize a local Minima
yeah it's an analogy for depicting
States
um where the Minima are substates and
the local Minima would be the closest
sub state to visit
uh where
um it has some gravitational pull by
being a Minima it has
um a gradient where you would get pulled
to a to a point
um and then so is it so is it something
like that if if you've practiced it's
sort of the idea that if if you're an
expert with a hammer everything looks
like a nail it's that you have an A
Priory category system and so anything
that even vaguely approximates that is
likely to get processed by that system
is that is that and is that a is that a
consequence maybe of the brain's desire
to use maximally efficient neurological
processing because if you have the
hardware for a perception you might as
well utilize that rather than going
through all the difficulty of having to
generate a whole new perception right
that's a that's very complicated I think
that works I mean uh
um again if we go to pathology and
depression such a
uh prevalent Disorder so it's a maybe a
useful one to go to again but you know
if one one's mind naturally
uh
moves in an itinerant way here and there
um and in health it it moves very freely
but uh in a depression it's very easy to
fall into that Minima that is related to
the depression that has a negative uh
bias
um so that would be a an example of
falling into a local Cinema yeah right
so it's something like the hyper
availability of already laid down
pathways
yes
and their pathological conditions where
that's much more likely
yeah well that that happens when that
that happens when you have to make an
immediate response which of course makes
sense right because you're going to use
automatized perceptual structures in an
emergency because you don't have time to
do anything else
we'll be right back to our conversation
with Dr Carhart Harris first we wanted
to give you a sneak peek at Jordan's new
documentary logos and literacy
I was very much struck by how the
translation of the biblical writings
jump started the development of literacy
across the entire world illiteracy was
the norm the pastor's home was the first
school and every morning it would begin
with singing the Christian faith is a
singing religion probably 80 percent of
scripture memorization today exists only
because of what is sung this is amazing
here we have a Gutenberg Bible Bible
printed on the Press of Johann gubern
science and religion are opposing forces
in the world but historically that has
not been the case now the book is
available to everyone from Shakespeare
to modern education and medicine and
science to to civilization itself it is
the most influential book in all history
and hopefully people can walk away with
at least a sense of that
if it's familiar it's it's easy to go
there you know and so in a depressive
presentation it's easy it's easy to fall
back there yeah now do you practice
clinically no I don't no no just
research but you were you were trained
psychoanalytically as as well as
scientific as well as
neuroscientifically
uh as an academic I studied and got a
master's qualification in psychoanalysis
I also had my own analysis but I've
never actually trained clinically as an
analyst myself I see I see okay let's
contrast um
psychedelics and antidepressants for a
moment and so let me tell you what I
understood from your papers and you tell
me if I've got it right perhaps so both
of those chemicals seem to affect the
serotonergic system preferentially and
my understanding of the serotonin system
is that it one of the things it does is
modulates cognitive flexibility in a and
so if you have high levels of
serotoninergic function which would be
associated with social status let's say
you're more resistant to error
propagation
now but the psychedelics also affect the
serotonin system but they seem to
decrease
cognitive specialization and
canalization right and so they make the
system more open not to catastrophic
failure but to play
and so do you know how they how do they
how detailed is their knowledge about
how that's actually occurring at a
cellular level what what is the chemical
itself doing at a cellular or or even or
even a higher order biological level so
if we begin with the classic
psychedelics compounds like LSD or
psilocybin or DMT then the chemicals are
binding to serotonin 2A receptors so a
certain serotonin receptor one of the at
least 14 serotonin receptors these
receptors are heavily expressed in the
cortex and especially so in high level
cortex and they're expressed
postsynaptically so on the receiving
neuron of communication
and they modulate the excitability of
the host cell that The receptors are so
when they stimulate do they make it more
excitable more excitable it's more
excitable all right and so actually it
all begins there because if you think of
excitability like temperature you're
kind of dialing up you're dialing up
temperature you're dialing up the
excitability of the cell but the catch
it seems is what that translates to in
terms of population level activity
because all the computation and the map
to
I guess information processing and and
experience it it doesn't seem to happen
at the Single Cell level it's it's how
the cells interact and interrelate and
and really it's it's once we get to the
population level so populations of
neurons uh oscillating together so is is
that within cortical columns or between
them or do we know
well there's that dose dependent it
would be a great thing too no and I
imagine that there's increased
communication between cortical columns
where cortical columns are like basic
computational information processing
computational units uh in the brain the
cortical column like a column for a
particular you know orientation in in
space recognizing that right and they're
specialized yes the specializes they
have as far as communication between
them that's right yeah but but High
communication within them you know and
right right and that's yes so they're
specific for specific categories so the
very rudimentary level of visual
processing like or things oriented in
this uh vertical domain or horizontal
um so yeah I suspect that there's
communication increased communication
across cortical columns and if we look
at things things like systems or
networks in the brain which we can map
quite well with functional magnetic
resonance imaging for example
then we can see that there's increased
communication across networks under
psychedelics that's actually a very well
replicated finding uh okay so so let me
throw something out you hear and tell me
what you think about it so
so I've been conceptual and uh
conceptualizing neuroticism as the
proclivity of a conceptual system to
collapse in response to error so the
more the higher your levels of Baseline
negative emotion the less error it takes
per unit of collapse something like that
so and then you can you can make an
analogy you can you can make an
analogous case for creativity so we know
that creative people
if I ask creative people if I give them
a word and then I say tell me all the
words you can that this word reminds you
of in a minute you can map out their
associations and the creative people
will produce a higher volume of
associations so they're more verbally
fluent but their associations will be
more distant in conceptual space
so the less creative you are the more
synonymous the the co-activated words
will be
so then you can imagine that if your CR
creativity is in part a consequence of
how much co-activation
other idea is likely to take place but
then it's also a function of how distant
the co-activation and so if the
psychedelics are increasing
excitability
I wonder if they're
doing something analogous to the
co-activation of more disparate columns
as well
that's strange because they also seem to
inhibit
semantic
processing to some degree people become
less able to talk able to verbalize
what's happening to them so it doesn't
exactly look like it's semantic
excitation that's occurring it's more
like it seems to be occurring more at
the level of image in some sense than
semantically but there does seem to be
this red broadening of creativity that
and the anal analog might be there
without excitability is that any given
idea is more likely to activate a set of
associated ideas yeah there is some
evidence in this direction of things
like uh category mixing uh binocular
rivalry paradigms you have mixed
percepts uh occur more often under
psychedelic psychedelics also when
looking at um spreading semantic
activation uh
um
uh there's evidence that the semantic
network is is broader under the
Psychedelic
um
so
um while people might not be able to
articulate themselves very well
um
they the the S the semantics in terms of
meaning is is certainly very rich It is
Well you get this permanent effect too
that um
Roland Griffis detected right so in his
psilocybin experiencing participants the
ones that reported a mystical experience
showed a one standard deviation increase
in trade openness which is the
creativity trait one year later that's a
walloping effect for a single dose you
know it also makes you know I read that
and I thought wow that's amazing but it
also made me sort of leery because it
does indicate a permanent transformation
it looks like a permanent transformation
in personality and in neurological
function now you might think well it
wouldn't hurt everybody to be moved one
standard deviation up on the creativity
scale but you'd only say that if you
assumed that creativity was a benefit
without a cost and I've never seen a
benefit without a cost so you know one
of the things I'm wondering for example
if you're if you're higher in
neuroticism to begin with is an
increment in openness A Plus or a
negative because I've known really open
highly neurotic people and one of the
problems with that personality
constellation is that they often saw the
branches off that they're sitting on
right because their ideas are so they
can't get a grip on anything stable
because they're so mutable in their
cognition and that seems to drive a
certain degree of negative emotion right
because they're always they can't settle
on any identity for example and so they
destabilize themselves and like I don't
know if we've you know we've looked for
pathologies associated with creativity
for a long time and manic depressive
disorder seems to at least at least in
principle to be Associated there's not a
lot of evidence for the pathology of
creativity but like I said you don't
often get a benefit without a cost yes
yes it I imagine uh
openness sort of tops out into
um
another personality skills like I think
it's the isync one it would probably be
called psychoticism
um and you know so and also trait
schizotype is maybe right right crossing
over with uh with extreme extreme
openness yeah well you get a false
positive problem right because the thing
about creative people is they're pretty
good at identifying patterns in sparse
data but the problem with identifying
patterns in sparse data is sometimes you
see things that aren't there apophenia
yeah yes and and I think that's one of
the limitations one of the things to
watch out for one of the pitfalls of of
psychedelic use
um and maybe psychedelic therapy is
seeing things that aren't there or uh in
a sense look being too zealous in one's
learning from the data that's allowed to
come up yeah well I talked to Dennis
with McKenna yeah yeah and and so they
were the brothers who established the
protocols for domestication of
psilocybin mushrooms right and Dennis
and his brother Terence who's the more
famous McKenna they went to Mexico I did
a podcast with him just a couple of
weeks ago they went to I think it was
Mexico decades ago and ate a lot of
psilocybin mushrooms in a couple of
months and it The Experience gripped
Terence in a way that never really let
him go from what Dennis relates and
Terence developed these some of his
ideas are very interesting but some of
them were quite Baroque and strange and
Dennis told me that you know those ideas
some of them had to do with uh Alien
possession for example because it's not
that uncommon for people having a
psychedelic experience to have
experiences that are akin to alien
abduction experiences the kind of thing
John Mack reported and it wasn't obvious
it seemed that Dennis had concluded that
some of these ideas had gripped Terence
for decades in a way that
produced a different kind of
canalization right they knocked him out
of his normal perception but they
knocked him into a new state where he
saw patterns that he then pursued
literally for decades that turned out
likely to be both false and
counterproductive yes so
yes well whereas the practitioners of
Health would say things like hold it all
lightly in a sense don't believe
anything you know uh like the Buddha
said
um question everything and test test it
all yourself don't take anything on
faith in a sense
um there is this other thing that can
happen where you take something like an
intense DMT experience where it feels
like you've encountered another
Dimension all together that's populated
by seemingly sentient beings and you
come back from that compelling
experience
uh deeply immersive experience and you
come back from it and think ah I didn't
know I didn't know that that other world
actually exists and I've experienced it
now kind of solipsistic
reasoning uh and it is a bit like you
know a kind of athenia trap you're like
ah well I've experienced it I've seen it
now I know it's real right well and I've
seen it with emotional Punch Yeah right
it's not merely the perception it's the
perception see this is this also happens
to people I've tried to understand the
phenomenology of paranoid schizophrenia
so here's what happens to someone who's
paranoid so imagine they're watching the
TV
maybe the Pope's on and all of a sudden
what the pope is saying is hyper
meaningful so it seems like one of those
experiences maybe it's because the
person is stressed that their a Priory
perceptions are no longer filtering
their current perception and so now all
of a sudden the Pope's message is hyper
meaningful and it manifests itself
emotionally they can't look away and
they feel it's as if he's talking
directly to me
it's the only way they can explain it
now more intelligent people are more
likely to become paranoid if they become
schizophrenic so the first thing that
happens is they have an aberrant
experience and the experience might be
well it was like the pope was talking to
me and maybe that's not even enough to
get them going maybe that has to happen
three or four times with different news
media and maybe it's only when a certain
topic is being discussed right and so
then they conclude the only way to
account for this intensification of
emotional experience is that I am being
specifically targeted that I have some
Cosmic Destiny let's say something like
that it's the only thing that makes
sense out of the emotional experience
and then having established that as an
axiom they build a whole paranoid belief
system on top of it and the thing about
talking to someone who's paranoid
schizophrenic is that within the
delusional axiomatic system they're
pretty rigorous
but the axioms are something like oh I'm
absolutely sure the pope spoke to me
when he was on TV and you can't shake
that right that becomes that becomes the
axis around the witch the whole world
turns and it seems to be instantiated in
them because of the intensity of the
emotional experience when that message
was received yeah yeah
uh Kapoor is um called aberrant salience
like the right right the salience which
uh he and others would relate to
dopaminergic functioning you know
there's a hypersensitivity of the
mesolympic dopamine system and that's
encoding the excessive salience with
which you're imbuing certain experiences
and so in a sense
there it's feeding a happy and learning
actually you know an associative
learning
um and no
if it is if it is if it is dopaminergic
too I mean the dopamine system produces
that sense of reward so that would be
real like
engrossed engagement but the dopamine
system also produces reinforcement so it
sort of backtracks the neural patterns
of activation that occurred just before
the reward and it strengthens them so no
Not only would you get that sense of
grip
because the message say is being
delivered to you but along with that
dopaminergic hyper production would
become an increased probability that
those neural systems are in fact
reinforced in their development by the
very experience yes well it's confidence
you know when you're I get it now I get
it now yeah you know it right it comes
with a feeling of this this you know
slanted in a positively valence way it
feels good to know it feels good to be
confident and typically it's difficult
to be the opposite of confident to be
swimming in uncertainty
yeah yeah well right right exactly well
that that also accounts for the
attraction of certainty right is that
when you're certain of something well
this is relevant to your model
if you're certain of something you
dispense with what would be excess
entropy like the entropy is all the
doubts what could be this could be this
could be this it could be this could be
this I mean that's there's play there
but it's well I think part of the
distinction there too is that's the
involuntary play right when you're
plagued by doubts you're not playing
it's you're subject to them it's
different than sitting there
contemplating different possibilities
sort of at your own rate it's very
different thing to be visited by an
intense barrage of doubt
and that's no one enjoys that and and
that might again be the difference
between neuroticism and creativity right
because a neurotic person who's
like obsessing about doubt is
contemplating a whole set of ideas
right but so you think well what's the
difference between that and creative
play and a huge part of it does seem to
be the distinction between voluntary and
involuntary you know one of the things
you do for people who are obsessive is
you say
well you know
you're disgusted by this thing you're
looking at and and then that thought
comes and visits you
involuntarily before you go to sleep at
night bring that thought to mind
voluntarily and play with it and if they
do that religiously let's say that'll
often decrease the intensity of the
thoughts so whether you you have the
thoughts in the spirit of challenge or
whether they're being forced upon you
also seems to be an indication of
whether you're playing creatively or if
you're subject to something like
neurotic overload and stress
um
yeah when we think of uh
um you know certain so-called third wave
psychotherapies like mindfulness-based
uh cognitive therapy or acceptance and
commitment therapy I guess there is a
promotion of a ability to sit with
difficult feelings to almost play with
them you know some of the acceptance and
commitment therapy techniques involve
play like you know you have a
Arachnophobia and and you'll you'll wear
a toy spider around your neck I guess
that's exposure therapy but but you know
or or you have a negative cognitive bars
in depression thinking you're worthless
and you'll wear a sign that says I'm
worthless and the fact that it's there
all the time becomes like comedic and it
it loses its punch because it's out
there and it's silly rather than it's in
here and getting changed you're also
you're also reversing the Predator prey
relationship in some sense right if
you're afraid of spiders but you're
wearing one you're now bigger than your
fear
no one if and so and so you've you've
you've even though you still might be
afraid you're you're also allowing that
part of you that can transcend the fear
to become the part that you're
identifying with and and you do that
constantly in Psychotherapy is to and
you know one of the one of the constant
findings with regard to exposure therapy
is it's not so much that people get less
afraid
it's that they get braver and the
distinction there is really important
because it turns out that if you expose
a person voluntarily to one thing
they're afraid of
they become less afraid of classes of
things you know the psych the
psychoanalysts when they went after the
behaviorists for exposure therapy they
said you'll get symptom substitution you
know you train someone who's agrophobic
to get in an elevator they'll still be
afraid of death
but it turns out that if you train them
to
expose themselves to the elevator they
are simultaneously exposing themselves
to the fear of death and they actually
become braver across contexts as a
consequence of the single exposures and
there is something in that that's that's
play you know with my clients I also I
always used to play with them it's like
okay
there's the elevator you don't want to
look at it can you look at it from 30
feet away no well how about 40 feet how
about 200 feet like you'd find a place
where they could play
that was right on the edge of Their Fear
right and then and so there was play
right on the edge of fear and then maybe
you could get the person 40 feet away
say well will you look at the elevator
for like just glance at it well you look
at it for 10 seconds no will you glance
at it yes can you glance at it for two
seconds yes you just push that Horizon
of play and you do that sequentially
across sessions and that seems to work
well it's sort of like how people learn
everything right because you learn on
the edge and the edge is where the plate
Edge is where the serious play takes
place so
yeah so what are you working on now
you've got this paper you sent me that
that's coming out I presume at some
point in the future it was a preprint
yeah what's that what's out the Horizon
of your investigations at the moment
what are you what are you contemplating
well I do quite a lot of brain Imaging
work uh trying to better understand uh
what is the Psychedelic experience in
the brain how is it encoded in in brain
activity and bodily activity it's easy
to feed to brain Centric but it does
seem to be a very important organ for
experience
um uh so there's that so I'm doing I'm
planning uh an extensive intensive brain
Imaging study of the psalocybin
experience uh
people will have repeat sessions with
the Psychedelic
four separate dosing sessions with
solocybin
um including quite high dose sessions
and the majority of the session will
actually be spent in a MRI scanner and
so this hasn't been done before we've
done you know 10 minutes at at the most
really
um of what we call a resting state run
You Close Your Eyes the scanner runs and
we collect some data and then make some
mappings to subjective ratings but what
I'm trying to do now is to be a bit more
involved with the experience sampling so
the the sample of your experience with
uh more regular subjective ratings but
in order to do that and not contaminate
the data with asking people to do
ratings you need a lot of repeats you
need a lot of data so this is why we
have to dose people it's actually four
times and have them go into the scanner
for three more or less hour long
sessions under drug
well how do you keep the experience
positive for them when you're doing that
because that it's pretty clinical
environment generally to have people in
an MRI and of course set and setting is
so important to to the facilitation of a
a psychotherapeutic psychedelic
experience how do you how do you manage
that with the MRI yeah well it's
surprisingly well tolerated because it's
it's it's actually quite unsurprising as
an environment
um and we will have a pre-dose scan
where people will acclimatize
um and so that initial habituation to
being in an unusual environment that is
very loud and and when the first you
know tone of the scanner begins
um it can be quite jarring but that's
being repeated all the time for a long
period of time so you very quickly
habituate to that initial shock and then
it becomes actually very reliable
there's not nothing you know new
entering your visual field apart from
what's playing out in your mind's eye
with our eyes closed so it's quite a
stable environment and you know you can
you can go very deep
um and we this isn't a clinical trial we
won't be recruiting people with say
depression for this study these will be
people who you know meet criteria for
for being healthy
um right and uh and we'll also have had
previous experience with psychedelics
and that's a safety consideration here
so we are trying to go deep it is a sort
of Psychonauts
um
you know dream innocence uh study like
this yeah
so what what are you what are you
hypothesizing what what what what's
known already about brain activation
during psychedelic experiences and how
will you extend that what are you what
are you expecting to learn yeah well
it's entropic brain principle is
something I introduced uh close to 10
years ago now which is a very simple
principle that says that the the entropy
or the unpredictability of spontaneous
brain activity increases during the
Psychedelic experience and the magnitude
of that increase in brain entropy
correlates with the uh increase in the
richness of conscious experience the
richness of right okay uh phenomenal
consciousness
okay so so okay so let's let me ask you
about that so there's this emerging idea
I suppose it's a couple of decades old
but it's been elaborated more recently
that
Consciousness exists on the border
between Order and Chaos right and that
and and your proposition there is that
if you add more
if you add a richer
Activity Set entropically that the field
of Consciousness or the breadth or the
depth of Consciousness actually
increases so what what do you what do
you make of ideas that Consciousness
whatever it exists exists on the border
between Order and Chaos and what do you
think it means
ontologically
for Consciousness itself to expand as
brain entropy increases
yeah well it's the Psychedelic
experience in terms of what it's like to
be in that state that that that model is
there in the entropic brain model as
well that says that Consciousness exists
at so-called criticality you know that
critical point uh
um between uh you know the extreme poles
of extreme order like a frozen system or
an extremely you know random system like
a gas you know there's some kind of
critical point at which you get certain
properties uh of organization things
like hierarchical organization
um long-range correlations or
um Freer information flow throughout the
system and information transfer across
scales as well so like fractal
organization
um so why does that why does the
hierarchical organization and the
fractal organization emerge at
criticality
how are those related
yeah
and we know
I imagine some people know and it's
probably to do with efficiency
um
I imagine it's to do with him efficient
information
transfer it doesn't happen so well in a
frozen system because things don't go
very far there aren't sufficient
Dynamics and then maybe in a gas things
are just too loose there's no
integration right so so there's a sweet
spot so you get so that's it so it so
the claim is something like that at that
border between Chaos and Order
hierarchical organization
well-structured hierarchical
organization is likely to emerge yeah
and I guess it does say that hierarchy
and nature serve some kind of you know
efficient
um function
um some adaptive so it's useful well so
you know in the in the Genesis chapter
that's essentially that's essentially
the model that's being pointed at so
what you have is the the proposition
that the Divine word is the creative
agent is something like the idea that
the order that is good emerges out of
the dynamic interplay between Order and
Chaos so the process of dynamically
intermediating between Order and Chaos
is something like the word and the word
in the Genesis chapter is specified as
that which generates the habitable order
that is good
that's the proposition then there's a
meta proposition that emerges out of
that which is that the spirit of man and
woman is made in that image that's the
fundamental axiomatic
proposition that the narrative is
putting forward it's very interesting to
me
that that's true at the mythological and
narrative level and that it's
increasingly mapped out at the
neurological level using language that's
actually quite similar right the chaos
so the tohu vabohu is what the spirit of
God contends with at the beginning of
time and tohu babohu I'm probably not
saying it right but it's also talm which
is a derivation of the word timeout
which is Mesopotamian and it's the
dragon that Marta carves up at the
beginning of time to make the world and
so it's it's like this place where
what's predatory is encountered and
mastered that's all hidden in the
symbolic complexity of that initial
story but the fundamental idea is that
there's an eternal process that operates
at the border between Chaos and Order
and if it's operating optimally it
generates the order that's good that's
the days of creation
so it's very much analogous to this idea
that the hierarchical structure emerges
out of this interplay between Chaos and
Order there there is this other curious
angle here you know if psychedelics can
increase
properties uh of criticality signatures
of criticality like fractal organization
uh long-range correlations
um
uh there's things like critical slowing
which means that the system doesn't
recover very quickly it recovers slowly
from a perturbation that perturbation
sort of reverberates through the system
more easily it's a more sensitive system
when the systems are criticality anyway
all of those properties if psychedelics
increase those
um the strength of those signatures of
criticality then that implies that
normal waking consciousness is poised at
what I understand I hope I get this
right would be a sub-critical regime
towards order towards that Frozen system
you know it's close to criticality but
it's not quite there and you can dial it
up further and see stronger signatures
of criticality
I wonder why it would I wonder if it
would be biased somewhat towards order
for purposes of efficiency
do you suppose maybe for muster or maybe
for Mastery you know I I wonder for ease
of Mastery right because well if you can
Implement a traumatized routines it's
it's less energy demanding
right but the price you'd pay for that
is that you would be learning as quickly
but the advantage would be that you're
doing what you already know how to do in
a manner that doesn't require a lot of
energy output yeah I think of it again a
little bit like Civilization and it's
discontents you know like we
um started to control
the critical world you know that that uh
was organized is organized in in its you
know beautiful rich and diverse and
fractal way but we started to you know
manage our our food source and and
structure our world in a particular way
and now it's you know it's got
ridiculous how how we've done that
um and I imagine and actually there's a
bit of curious um
neuroimaging data that suggests that
certain
properties of brain activity that
um are suggestive of sub-criticality or
too much order like the alpha Rhythm
it's a very dominant rhythm in the human
brain in that adult human brain it's
lower in infants it increases as you go
up to adulthood and actually it's also
maximal in humans relative to other
species so it's like an adult human
Rhythm and if you look at the sort of
prominence of different rhythms in brain
activity it's the main one you know it's
a big peak in the alpha range
but this curious study was done in in
India looking at different people either
sort of living
more um you know at one with nature or
people living in dense Urban
environments and those who lived in the
dense Urban environments had stronger
Alpha rhythms and for me that was
suggested of people who were kind of
have become kind of divorced from the
criticality of nature yeah they're more
characterized them right right they're
too ordered yeah well the urban
environment actually lends itself to
that because a lot of the things that we
build are structured so that we only
have to glance at them to know what they
are
right so they're like a lot of our
design Technologies are AIDS to
catalyzation think about the shiny
outside surface of a car I mean some of
that's for aerodynamic efficiency but a
lot of it is so you can just categorize
it at a glance all the complexity is
hidden yeah yes exactly and so the whole
Urban this is especially true in
modernist Urban environments everything
is smooth and one pixel right and the
advantage to that is well you don't have
to pay any attention to it but the
disadvantage of it is it's pretty it's
desert like in terms of its richness
right much different than the surface of
a tree or a plant say quite yeah it's
it's my numbing yeah and uh right that
may be one of the reasons why Urban
environments are associated with were
worse uh Mental Health
right right right yeah well there's
there is some indication of that and
that actually it's the deprivation of
the fractal structure of the surfaces
that's associated with that yes we need
to you know we need to come home to
Nature and see that practicality to see
that richness to be reminded of our of
our origin in a sense yeah right yeah
well that that ties us back to the
beginning of the conversation all right
well we should stop this part of the
conversation and we'll proceed for those
of you watching and listening I always
talk to my guests for another half an
hour on the daily wire plus platform
that's an addition not a subtraction by
the way because I wasn't doing that
before and so
um those of you who are interested I'm
going to talk to Dr Carhart Harris to
Robin about the development of his
interest in the in the psychological the
phenomenological and the Psychedelic I'm
very interested in how people's
interests make themselves manifest and
what beckons to them let's say
hello everyone I would encourage you to
continue listening to my conversation
with my guest on dailywireplus.com